---
title: "Thoughts on the Future of Cloud"
date: 2022-07-06T00:00:00-00:00
draft: false
---


### The Evolution of Cloud
In the beginning, companies with tech needs would be required to maintain and operate all the servers necessary to run their business applications. Entire teams and departments of sys-admins and IT specialists would need to be hired, servers and everything that goes along with them-- cooling, space, etc.-- would all be part of the cost of doing business when tech was involved. 
Then came the first generation of clouds like AWS, Azure, and GCP offering Infrastructure as a Service. The early versions of these IaaS clouds were barebones but their value was clear: elastically provision your compute based on demand and create infrastructure at scale without managing the underlying hardware. With this promise companies like Walmart no longer have to worry about building out a word class hardware team, they can simply trust their cloud provider to handle that for them while they focus on providing value for their customers as a retailer. Likewise small startups didn't need to stick servers in the corner of their office they could just provision compute in the cloud and focus their time entirely on finding product-market-fit. 
Of course, IaaS was not a panacea. For every sys-admin that no longer needed to manage a physical environment companies needed to hire a DevOps engineer to configure their cloud environment. Turns out IaaS was pretty much just an API over physical infrastructure which means pretty much all the knowledge needed to create a proper application footprint in the cloud was the same knowledge needed even before the cloud. It was better than phsyical servers, but not by much. 
Then came Heroku and the rise of Platforms as a Service that took the cloud to the next level. Now you really didn't even need any low level infrastructure knowledge you could just write your app and deploy with the click of a button. They were limited at first but PaaS has grown tremendously and now even all the main IaaS clouds offer PaaS products like Elastic Beanstalk, Azure App Service, and Google Cloud's App Engine. In addition we saw new clouds like Digital Ocean, Netlify, and Firebase that pushed PaaS even further. PaaS wasn't just limited to compute. Data storage with S3, databases and auth with Firebase and RDS, static sites with Netlify, etc. There exists a PaaS solution for pretty much any part of the application stack today and the productivity it has unlocked in the world of tech cannot be understated. 