---
title: "Is Work-Life Balance Worth It?"
date: 2022-07-27
draft: false
description: "In the debate of work-life balance versus work-life integration it seems as though balance is winning out over passion as more and more people view life as the hours spent between clocking in and clocking out. Why is this viewpoint dominating and does it lead to a fulfilling life?"
thumbnail: "The_Blacksmith.jpg"
---

I recently read a [tweet](https://twitter.com/shelbyn_23/status/1549944330646949890?s=20&t=a8NQKrJuA61IW0TGunCV0A) expressing exasperation with the standard 8-9 hour workday and how little time it leaves for life outside of work. Coincidentally the same day I came across this [beautiful essay](https://every.to/p/what-i-miss-about-working-at-stripe) by Brie Wolfson about her nostalgia for her time working at Stripe. What Brie misses most was the long workdays, the stress, the cameraderie, and being part of a group of people giving their all towards achieving a shared mission. These two distinct viewpoints reflect a difference in attitude toward work-life balance that I've seen take shape in "the discourse" online and even among friends & family. The former viewpoint believes that work is simply a means to an end for money, purely transactional, and that "life" is supposed to be lived outside of work. The latter viewpoint views work as an integral part of one's life and that attemping to bisect the two is not a recipe for a happy life.

It often feels as though my generation predominantly agrees with the former view of work-life balance while I personally believe that to live a fulfilled life one must seek work-life *integration*. When I see tweets like the one above it makes me wonder if my belief is correct and if it is then why do so many people feel the opposite? Why do so many view work as some punishment or inconvenience that must be endured so that they can live their "real" lives after? The mindest of work-life integration can be an ideal that's not available to everyone but most of the individuals in my social circle that try to separate work and life are in white collar jobs. It's easy to say people are just more lazy in this day and age but that seems like a cop-out to me and the more I think about this issue the more I feel that _the work-life balance attitude is the natural result of various environmental incentives._

## Caring Doesn't Pay
My first instinct regarding this issue is too many people in my generation have seen others get burned (or they themselves got burned) by caring about work too much. Brie talks about late nights full of tears, stress, and joy. She mentions cancelling a vacation after her manager asked because her colleagues were working 15 hour days and she didn't want to abandon them. The opportunity to work with a team of people you highly respect and throwing your all into a shared mission with them as Brie describes is a prospect I'm very drawn to and I firmly believe everyone should experience that at some point in their life. And yet it's probably more common than not that you dedicate your blood, sweat, and tears to a company only to get fucked over. Maybe there's a market downturn and you get laid off because of poor decisions by leadership; maybe the startup simply fails; or maybe it succeeds/ gets acquired and liquidation preferences leave you with little to no reward for your equity. The vast majority of statups are not financially rewarding for anyone other than the founding team so purely from a financial standpoint it can be irrational to dedicate your life to one.

But startups are unusual in their own right! Even if they aren't completely financially rational there's a ton to be gained through connections, reputation, and skills that you can pick up by dedicating yourself at the right startup. Most people that emphasize work-life balance probably work at an enterprise where many of those upsides are less prevalent and there is even less incentive to care about the work. During my time at Microsoft I could have been the most productive engineer in the world and the bottom line for Microsoft wouldn't have changed. I could have died and the bottom line for Microsoft wouldn't have changed. When you are so far removed from the result of your labor and the outcomes are so detached from the personal inputs there's very little incentive to find meaning in the work. Enterprises also fail to create environments of agency in most cases. Orders come down from "the top" with little input from ICs and more often than not opportunities to take "ownership" are really just an excuse by a manager to shift more responsibilities downwards without doing the same for the associated upside and rewards.  

The bare minimum area most enterprises could improve on is just doing a better job at valuing employees in general. As it is now even if you work yourself to the bone and deliver real value to a business there's a good chance you'll be passed over for a promotion due to political reasons or the company will prioritize bringing someone external to fill a role above you instead of hiring internally. It's hard to speak on behalf of other industries on this specific topic but at least in tech it can be far more rational to jump jobs every [2-3 years](https://developerpitstop.com/how-long-do-software-engineers-stay-at-a-job/#:~:text=Around%2050%25%20of%20software%20engineers,developer%20stays%20in%20one%20role.) than it is to stay at one company for an extended period of time. How is someone supposed to foster a deep understanding and affinity for their work if they are incentivized to leave every couple years? How are they supposed to be passionate about a mission if they're treated as expendable?

## Work Has Changed, Work Hasn't Changed
Beyond poor work environments and bad leadership there's also the fundamental problem that most work is just boring. The world is full of interesting problems and disciplines to master and I'm lucky that I get to work on my craft of software engineering every day. Meanwhile when talking to friends the majority of their day-to-day responsibilities inclue things like copying rows from an email to an Excel document, shifting images on a PowerPoint slide to be *just* right, or compiling reports with little creative contribution. There's two things that strike me about their descriptions of work:
1) Most of this work could be automated or at least dramatically minimized
2) Most of this work does not require 8 hours a day

Work will feel dull when the nature of the work is dull. This is obvious and yet I'm constantly shocked by how many companies will go through great pain to hire the "best and brightest" from the most prestigious universities only to then have them spend their days copying rows from emails into Excel documents. There is an abundance of low hanging fruit for many businesses to reduce toil and unlock the creative productivity of their employees which would make many of these jobs more fulfilling and exciting, not to mention more valuable.  
Secondly, most information jobs today shouldn't require an individual to be at a desk for 8 hours a day and as more toil is reduced that will only become more true. It's almost a trope by now to point out that the 9-5 workday makes sense for factory work as seen in the industrial revolution but doesn't make sense for most of today's white-collar jobs. While I think this argument is often taken too far I *do* believe there's a lot of improvements that can be made and different work-styles to be experimented with to reduce an employees time on the clock without reducing productivity. 

The main takeaway from this is that you *don't* need to work 15 hour days to care or be passionate about your job! When Brie talks about burning the midnight oil it's in the context of an early stage ambitious startup. Most companies do not fit that mold and that's okay! You do not endear yourself to employees by making them work 8 hours to do a job that can be done in 4 and in Brie's own words: "*you can love something without it having to hurt.*"In today's world it's more effective to focus on outputs rather than just time spent manning the assembly line.

## The Burdens of Adulthood
Bad work environments and boring jobs aren't where the problems end either. It also feels as though we have less time today than we had in the past. I am extremely fortunate to work as a software engineer in tech where employees have more leverage than normal. I can work from home and set my hours in a way most people can't and yet even I often feel overwhelmed keeping up with the responsibilities outside of work e.g. cleaning my apartment regularly, doing my laundry, excercising, buying groceries and cooking for myself, cleaning dishes, etc. Just taking care of the bare necessities often takes up most of my time outside of work and that's not even taking into account time spent with friends, leisure, hobbies, etc. Modern life is so full of [time taxes](https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2021/07/how-government-learned-waste-your-time-tax/619568/) just for daily survival that sometimes it feels like too much for one person to handle... and it might be.

In 1960 women were predominantly getting married [around the age of 20](https://www.bgsu.edu/ncfmr/resources/data/family-profiles/hemez-distribution-age-first-marriage-fp-20-09.html#:~:text=In%201960%2C%20men's%20median%20age,FP%2D19%2D06) and men around 22. Today those averages are at [28 and 29](https://www.prb.org/usdata/indicator/marriage-age-women/snapshot/#:~:text=The%20median%20age%20at%20first,across%20states%20and%20local%20areas) years old respectively. It's not an exaggeration to say that people today shoulder the burden of adulthood alone for far longer than they have in the past. Similarly in 1960 [about half](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/12/30/its-no-longer-a-leave-it-to-beaver-world-for-american-families-but-it-wasnt-back-then-either/#:~:text=As%20more%20mothers%20enter%20the,%2Dat%2Dhome%20dads) of mothers were stay-at-home mom's whereas today that number has dropped below 30%. The cumulative effect is that historically an individual could work 8-9 hours a day but many of the responsibilities of adulthood outside of work were lessened by the contribution of a spouse while today even with a spouse there's a good chance no one is staying home with the time to handle non-work responsibilities.

## What Can Be Done
So what can be done? I still believe the opportunity to enjoy one's work and to find meaning in it can and should be available to more people at some point in their lives. The onus is on all of us to push for changes from the actions of individual companies, to industries, to society as a whole. 

Some ideas for how to achieve more meaningful work for more people:

#### __Experiment with different work days__
- 4 day work weeks, 10-3, variable work hours, etc. There's plenty of room to experiment with different work schedules that better fit people's lives and do not sacrifice on creative/analytical output

#### __Create a culture of loyalty and respect__
- Hire internally
- Invest in employee development. If an employee leaves your company at the same level they joined that should be viewed as a failure in most instances. This means real investment in training and education beyond just online seminars or a Pluralsight subscription.
- Pay more, give better benefits. Pay is a sign of respect and should accurately reflect how valuable an employee is to an organization without that employee needing to employ Machiavellan negotiation tactics

#### __Improve the quality of work itself__
- Reduce toil with tech and give the existing workforce more creative/analytical responsibilities
- Promote agency with flatter org structures and more ownership. Create opportunities for employees to benefit more from the wins

#### __Reduce people's overall economic risk__
- Start offering internships for high school students and invest in on-the-job education. Instead of people entering the workforce at 22 years old with thousands of dollars of debt we should consider the benefits of them joining the workforce out of high school, debt free. This needs to be driven by the businesses and there's a whole bunch of caveats to making a dynamic like this work but it's possible. This is a whole other post I will write about in the future but there's a *lot* of room to change peoples economic outlook by changing the structure of the education-to-work pipeline.
- Make healthcare cheaper and separate from employment. Healthcare is one of the biggest spending categories for people in America. By making it cheaper you automatically make most people richer by some degree and by detaching from employment status you empower employees to more readily bad jobs and either take risks making their own companies or joining companies that they are passionate about.
- Make housing cheaper. By making housing cheaper across the board you enable people to more readily move and organize themselves physically in localities where they can meet people with interests such as theirs. If we want people to dedicate themselves to shared missions it's important that they can work and live near others with a similar mindset. Just between cheaper housing and healthcare you also pretty much enable single-income families to be more reasonable for a significant portion of the population. 

It's also valuable to recognize that many people's passions will change over time or won't be translatable into traditional economic activity such as a job. When I am a father my primary mission will be raising my children and that's a worthy goal more people in our society should engage in even if it's not immediately economically leverageable. Empowering people to live a life of meaning means more than just making them happy in a corporate job but there's also little reason why more corporate jobs can't be more [compelling](https://theoatmeal.com/comics/unhappy).  