---
title: "3 Modes of Consciousness"
slug: "3-modes-of-consciousness"
date: 2023-12-13
draft: false
description: null
thumbnail: null
---

I find that there are 3 main modes of consciousness that my brain can enter into: 
1. **Consuming** - the mode that is active when I watch TV or listen to music or scroll Twitter. It isn’t bad in and of itself (and it can be used to learn and be productive) but I must be careful not to spend an unbalanced amount of time in this mode. It's probably the most addictive mode and the easiest one to slip into because context switching into this mode is easy and with little cost. Overindulgence in this mode robs me of agency.
2. **Creating** - the mode that is hardest for me to enter and sustain. At the limit this mode of consciousness is what’s called Flow State. In this mode I think of _what_ instead of _how._ If I think of _how_ — how to use this tool, how to connect to an api, how to be grammatically correct — then I’m not purely in this mode. Context switching in this mode is destructive. 
3. **Solving** - the mode I find myself in the most often. In this mode I'm usually holding a lot of state in my mind at once and trying to optimize amongst many variables. I try to reason from principles and build a mental model of whatever I'm working on. I usually visualize things in this mode and quite literally rotate shapes in my head. In this mode I'm working towards a solution and usually find myself pushing to get across a finish line. Context switching in this mode is costly because of the state I carry around from problem to problem. 

Most of my time is spent in some combination of these three states of mind and one of the keys for me to avoid burnout is to make sure I am not spending too much time in any one of them. There's a 4th mode that I do not quite know how to classify yet other than to say it's the mode of **Awareness.** 